DRAFT: Automation API with Python (#5148)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/automation-api-python/index.md

---

> title: "Pulumi Automation API, Now In Python"

Reviewer: I think the title could be more descriptive, maybe something like: "Build software automation around your infrastructure with Automation API in Python"

Author: I'll have to shorten that, titles have a 60 char limit.

date: 2021-02-09
meta_desc: "Combine the power of Automation API with the flexibility of Python"
meta_image: automation_api.png
authors:
- komal-ali
tags:
- Automation API
- Python
---

> General-purpose languages enable Infrastructure as Software -- bringing tested toolchains and best practices to building infrastructure, e.g., languages, IDEs, testing, debugging, componentization, packaging, and versioning. Pulumi's Automation API is a robust programmatic layer on top of Pulumi's infrastructure engine. It exposes Pulumi programs and stacks as strongly-typed and composable building blocks. Automation API fully embeds the Pulumi engine inside your software projects enabling you to build modern cloud infrastructure automation projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
General-purpose languages enable Infrastructure as Software -- bringing tested toolchains and best practices to building infrastructure, e.g., languages, IDEs, testing, debugging, componentization, packaging, and versioning. Pulumi's Automation API is a robust programmatic layer on top of Pulumi's infrastructure engine. It exposes Pulumi programs and stacks as strongly-typed and composable building blocks. Automation API fully embeds the Pulumi engine inside your software projects enabling you to build software automation around entire infrastructure provisioning processes that normally require humans to operate.
```

Today, we are excited to announce Python support for this powerful feature, opening up a world of possibilities for Python developers.

<!--more-->

## Enabling Cloud Engineering

The Automation API is a subpackage in Pulumi’s language-specific SDKs that provides a programmable interface for creating and managing [Stacks]({{< relref "/docs/intro/concepts/stack" >}}) and performing infrastructure updates, refresh, previews, and destroy. You can define a Pulumi program as a function within your codebase and use methods to get and set configuration parameters programmatically. The Automation API uses a gRPC interface to execute programs that control and communicate with the core Pulumi engine.

> To use Automation API, install the Pulumi CLI, which bundles and distributes the core engine. Today it’s available for [Python](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/tree/master/sdk/python/lib/pulumi/x/automation), with support for [C#](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/compare/auto/dotnet) under active development.

Reviewer: doesn't it support other languages too?

Author: added

with connect(
        host=up_res.outputs['host'].value,
        user=up_res.outputs['db_user'].value,
        password=up_res.outputs['db_pass'].value,
        database=up_res.outputs['db_name'].value) as connection:
    print("db configured!")

    # make sure the table exists
    print("creating table...")
    create_table_query = """CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS hello_pulumi(
        id int(9) NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
        color varchar(14) NOT NULL);
        """
    with connection.cursor() as cursor:
        cursor.execute(create_table_query)
        connection.commit()

```

See the full database deployment and migration Automation API program in [Python](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/tree/main/python/database_migration).

## Automation API Resources

To get started with Automation API checkout these links:

- [Python documentation]({{< relref "/docs/reference/pkg/python/pulumi#module-pulumi.x.automation" >}})
- [Automation API examples](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples#python-examples)
- [Generating S3 static websites using Pulumi's Automation API in Python](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8XFjqzX9ZK4&t=64s&ab_channel=PulumiTV)

> Automation API is still in alpha. We maintain a list of [known issues](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Aarea%2Fautomation-api). Please [file more](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/issues/new?assignees=&labels=needs-triage&template=bug_report.md&title=) as you find them!

Reviewer: what do you define as an "alpha" feature?

Author: I don't define the release version, it's how it was introduced. Alex, should set the criteria for release versions.

---
title: "Automate Your Infrastructure with Automation API and Python"
date: 2021-02-09
meta_desc: "Combine the power of Automation API with the flexibility of Python"
meta_image: automation_api.png
authors:

> - komal-ali

Reviewer 2: I think this should be in your name @spara since I didn't actually write this.

<!--more-->

## Enabling Cloud Engineering

The Automation API is a subpackage in Pulumi’s language-specific SDKs that provides a programmable interface for creating and managing [Stacks]({{< relref "/docs/intro/concepts/stack" >}}) and performing infrastructure updates, refresh, previews, and destroy. You can define a Pulumi program as a function within your codebase and use methods to get and set configuration parameters programmatically. The Automation API uses a gRPC interface to execute programs that control and communicate with the core Pulumi engine.

To use Automation API, install the Pulumi CLI, which bundles and distributes the core engine. Today it’s available for [Python](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/tree/master/sdk/python/lib/pulumi/x/automation), [TypeScript/JavaScript](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/reference/pkg/nodejs/pulumi/pulumi/x/automation) and [Go](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/pulumi/pulumi/sdk/v2/go/x/auto), with support for [C#](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/compare/auto/dotnet) under active development.

## Automation Use Cases

> Let's look at two use cases where Pulumi customers are applying the Automation API. Our users have applied the Pulumi Automation API to these scenarios:

Reviewer 2: These two sentences are essentially saying the same thing.

```suggestion
Let's look at two use cases where Pulumi customers are applying the Automation API:
```

```python
# create (or select if one already exists) a stack that uses our inline program
stack = auto.create_or_select_stack(stack_name=stack_name,
                                    project_name=project_name,
                                    program=pulumi_program)

up_res = stack.up(on_output=print)
print(f"db host url: {up_res.outputs['host'].value}")

print("configuring db...")
with connect(
        host=up_res.outputs['host'].value,
        user=up_res.outputs['db_user'].value,
        password=up_res.outputs['db_pass'].value,
        database=up_res.outputs['db_name'].value) as connection:
    print("db configured!")

    # make sure the table exists
    print("creating table...")
    create_table_query = """CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS hello_pulumi(
        id int(9) NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
        color varchar(14) NOT NULL);
        """
    with connection.cursor() as cursor:
        cursor.execute(create_table_query)
        connection.commit()

```

See the full database deployment and migration Automation API program in [Python](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/tree/main/python/database_migration).

## Automation API Resources

> To get started with Automation API checkout these links and watch our video.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get started with Automation API check out these links and watch our video.
```
